# Power Apps: Troubleshooting and Monitoring

## Summary

[DevOps](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/overview/what-is-devops/) has become more and more ingrained into our **Power Platform** project lifecycle. Work item tracking and feedback tools for teamwork. Continuous integration and delivery for code changes and solution deployments. Automated testing for assurance, compliance and governance considerations. Microsoft's tool, **[Azure DevOps](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/overview/what-is-devops/#culture)** provides native capabilities to plan, work, collaborate and deliver. Each step along the way in our [**Power Platform DevOps** journey](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/power-platform/alm/devops-build-tools) can be tracked and monitored which will be the primary objective of this article.

This article will focus on troubleshooting and monitoring concepts for Power Apps Canvas Apps. For troubleshooting, we will summarize using the Monitor Tool and provide a reference to the Monitoring the Power Platform article "". For monitoring, we will again summarize what's needed to set up and link to additional references. Finally, we will explore creating manual tests within Azure DevOps for work item tracking.

## Troubleshooting Canvas Apps

Troubleshooting Canvas Apps covers a wide area of concern, ranging from building to deploying to maintaining. When building Canvas Apps the first tool I fell in love with was the Monitor Tool. I used it so much, I even wrote a multi part series covering how to use it to debug and store data points for future analysis!

The Monitor tool can help identify what properties are invoking which formulas when controls are initiated by a user. Navigation between screens, connecting to external data sources, even invoking Power Automate Flows are all captured.

<insert pic of monitor>

One technique I use frequently is to review the formula tab from a component record. Most of the time, the formula will be highlighted showing what code initiated the record captured in the Monitor Tool.

<insert highlighted formula>

### Replaying requests

Network records contain the request and response to a connector. The request can be extracted and replayed within the same browser session or other tools such as Postman. This can help quickly diagnose the issue and provide quick resolution.

An example of how this helped happened when I was had to search records within Dataverse using the ClearCollect method. The date and time used were represented as UTC or coordinated universal time. The Dataverse API expected a localized time based on the data type of the column. By replaying this in the browser I was able to understand what Dataverse was expecting and update the formula. In case you're wondering here is what the before and after looked like:

Before:



### Power Apps Checker

Power Apps Checkers runs in real time when editing an app. This instant feedback helps to understand when a formula may cause downstream issues. It provides the property and suggestions to remediate.

<insert powerapps real time>

Using Dataverse solutions, we can also run Power Apps Checker against the solution. Running against the solution provides artifacts which can be used to add to the backlog of work items to be addressed. This can also help identify the potential scope of an issue to better understand the severity.

<isnert power apps checker image>

### Building a Debug Container

One of the first things I did was implement a container object that could be used across screens. Within the container I included global variables used for the Azure DevOps org and project. The most impactful item within the container is a red button labeled Report. This button only does two things: Run a Power Automate Flow and invoke the Trace method. Below is the code within the OnSelect property of the Report button.

```
UpdateContext({PowerAppSessionDetails:GetCanvasAppDetails.Run()});
Trace(User().FullName & " debugged session " & PowerAppSessionDetails.GetCanvasAppDetailsResponse.outputs.headers.'x-ms-client-session-id',
TraceSeverity.Warning,
{
SessionId: PowerAppSessionDetails.GetCanvasAppDetailsResponse.outputs.headers.'x-ms-client-session-id',
RequestId: PowerAppSessionDetails.GetCanvasAppDetailsResponse.outputs.headers.'x-ms-client-request-id',
FlowClientTrackingId: PowerAppSessionDetails.GetCanvasAppDetailsResponse.clientTrackingId,
FlowTrackingId: PowerAppSessionDetails.GetCanvasAppDetailsResponse.trackingId}
);
```

#### The GetCanvasAppDetails Flow

This Power Automate Flow is designed for one simple purpose...provide the necessary user session information needed to help troubleshoot.

In the next section I'll cover formulas and objects I used to help troubleshoot my app as well as other Canvas Apps such as the Return to Workplace app.

### Error Handling and Notifying



#### Error

[Errors function - Power Apps | Microsoft Docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powerapps/maker/canvas-apps/functions/function-errors)

#### Validate

[Validate function - Power Apps | Microsoft Docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powerapps/maker/canvas-apps/functions/function-validate)

#### IfError and IsError

[IfError and IsError functions in Power Apps - Power Apps | Microsoft Docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powerapps/maker/canvas-apps/functions/function-iferror)

#### Notify

[Notify function - Power Apps | Microsoft Docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powerapps/maker/canvas-apps/functions/function-showerror)

#### Trace

## Where are Events coming from?

One question that seems to come up frequently (at least in my experience) when managing a Power App is understanding where events are coming from. When building an app from scratch, most likely you have a good idea of where things are happening. That said organizations are delivering  and implementing solutions that they may not have built in house. Knowing where and how to look for events is important.

Typically the first place I go if I am reviewing a published Power App is the Maker Portal or Power Platform Admin Center. Within here I can see which connections and Power Automate flows are used by my Power App.

<insert poer app connections>

If you have the ability to load the Monitor tool from the Maker Portal, this will help identify the network calls from the App with a desktop browser as described above.

### Dataverse

For Dataverse specifically, we have other areas we can explore to understand how and where business logic is applied. Typically we find three areas to check: Power Automate Flows with the Dataverse connector, Dynamics 365 workflows and Dynamics 365 Plug-ins.

For Power Automate Flows, look for 

For Plug-ins, review the Plug-in statistics in the Power Platform Admin Center. This calls out frequently used plug-ins.

For workflows, look at system jobs and processes to better understand if these are invoked.

